31 – 1
Construction Specification 31 – Concrete for Major
Structures
1. Scope
The work consists of furnishing, forming, placing, finishing, and
curing Portland cement concrete as required to build the structures
designated in Section 25 of this specification.
2. Material
Aggregates shall conform to the requirements of Section 25 and
Material Specification AGGREGATES FOR PORTLAND CEMENT
CONCRETE 522 unless otherwise specified.
Portland cement shall conform to the requirements of Material
Specification PORTLAND CEMENT 531 for the specified type. One
brand only of any type of cement shall be used in any single
structure as defined in Section 25.
Fly ash shall conform to the requirements of Material Specification
MINERAL ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE 532.
Blast furnace slag used as a partial substitution of Portland cement
in concrete shall conform to the requirements of Material
Specification MINERAL ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE 532.
Air-entraining admixtures shall conform to the requirements of
Material Specification CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE
533. If air-entraining cement is used, any additional air-entraining
admixture shall be of the same type as that in the cement.
Plasticizing admixtures shall conform to the requirements of
Material Specification CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE
533.
Water-reducing and/or retarding admixtures shall conform to the
requirements of Material Specification CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES
FOR CONCERTE 533.

31 – 2
Accelerating and water-reducing and accelerating admixtures, if
specified in Section 25, shall conform to the requirements of
Material Specification CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE
533.
Curing compound shall conform to the requirement of Material
Specification CONCRETE CURING COMPOUND 534.
Preformed expansion joint filler shall conform to the requirements of
Material Specification PREFORMED EXPANSION JOINT FILLER
535.
Sealing compound for joints shall conform to the requirements of
Material Specification SEALING COMPOUND FOR JOINTS IN
CONCRETE AND CONCRETE PIPE 536.
Waterstops shall conform to the requirements of Material
Specification NON-METALLIC WATERSTOPS 577 and METAL
WATERSTOPS 538 for the specified kinds.
Dowels shall be a plain, round steel bar conforming to the
requirements of Material Specification STEEL REINFORCEMENT
(FOR CONCRETE) 539.
Metal plates shall conform to the requirements of Material
Specification METAL 581 for structural quality or commercial or
merchant quality steel. Structural quality shall be used only if
specifically designated in the drawings or specifications.
Water used in mixing and curing concrete shall be clean and free
from injurious amounts of oil, salt, acid, alkali, organic matter, or
other deleterious substances.

31 – 3
3. Concrete Mix Design
Method 1
Responsibilities – The contractor is responsible for the design and
proportioning of the concrete. Job mixes shall be prepared to meet
the quality, consistency, and strength of concrete specified.
Submittals – At least 15 calendar days before the placement of any
concrete, the contractor shall provide the engineer with full
documentation to support each job mix and any admixtures to be
used in the work. The contractor shall furnish test results to the
engineer for each admixture showing that it meets the requirements
of Material Specification CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES FOR
CONCRETE 533. Job mixes are reviewed and accepted or
rejected by the engineer within 8 calendar days following the date of
submittal. After a job mix has been accepted, neither the source,
character, or gradation of the aggregates nor the type or brand of
cement or admixtures shall be changed without prior notice to the
engineer. Revisions or changes in a job mix that are determined to
be significant by the engineer shall follow the same submittal and
acceptance process as that for the initial job mix.
Design Criteria – The class of concrete shall be as specified in
section 25 and in accordance with the following specified
compressive strength
Class of Concrete
Specified Compressive
Strength (f’c) at 28
Days (lbs/in2)
5000 5,000
4000 4,000
3000 3,000
2500 2,500
Maximum water-cement ratio shall be 0.50, unless otherwise
specified.
Unless otherwise specified, the air content (by volume) of the
concrete at the time of placement shall be:

31 – 4
Maximum Size
Aggregate Air Content (%)
3 8⁄ inch to 1 inch 5 to 7
Over 1 inch 4 to 6
The consistency of all concrete shall allow it to be placed without
segregation or excessive laitance. Unless otherwise specified, the
slump shall be:
Type of Structural
Section Slump (inches)
Massive sections,
pavements, footings 2±1
Heavy beams, thick
slabs, thick walls (> 12
inches)
3±1
Columns, light beams,
thin slabs, thin walls (12
inches or less)
4±1
Superplasticized concrete shall be a concrete mix containing either
a water-reducing, high range admixture (ASTM C 494, Type F or G)
at a dosage rate that reduces the quantity of water required to
produce a concrete mix within the above slump range by 12 percent
or more, or a plasticizing admixture (ASTM C 1017) at a dosage
rate required to produce an increase in the slump of at least 2
inches more than that specified above.
A water-reducing admixture (ASTM C 494, Type F or G) and/or a
plasticizing admixture (ASTM C 1017) may be added to an
approved job mix without resubmittal and reapproval of the job mix
if the following requirements are met:
a. The admixture shall be introduced into the concrete mix as
specified by the manufacturer and be compatible with other
admixtures in the job mix.
b. The water content shall be equal to or less than that required
in the job mix without the admixture.
c. The cement content shall be the same as that required in the
job mix without the admixture.
d. The air content shall be within the specified range.

31 – 5
e. The slump shall not exceed 7.5 inches unless the contractor
can demonstrate before placement tat the job mix can be
placed without segregation or excessive laitance at a slump
greater than 7.5 inches. The concrete shall retain the
increased slump for not less than 30 minutes.
f. If the admixture is added at the job site, the slump of the
concrete before the addition of the admixture shall not exceed
the slump specified above for concrete that does not contain
the admixture.
Calcium chloride or other corrosive accelerators shall not be used
unless otherwise specified.
Fly ash may be used as a partial substitution for Portland cement in
an amount not greater than 25 percent (by weight) of cement in the
concrete mix unless otherwise specified.
Ground granulated blast-furnace slag may be used as a partial
substitution for Portland cement in amounts between 25 to 70
percent (by weight) of cement in the concrete mix unless otherwise
specified.
Job Mix Criteria – Proportioning of concrete for job mixes shall be
based on the standard deviation computed from compressive
strength tests of previous batch records or established by laboratory
trial mixes. Unless otherwise specified a compressive strength test
is the average of the compressive strengths of two standard cured
cylinders prepared and tested in accordance with Section 4
For a job mix based upon the standard deviation computed form
compressive strength tests of previous batch records, the previous
batches shall represent similar material and conditions to those
expected for the job mix and have a strength within 1,000 pounds
per square inch of the specified compressive strength (f’c) at 28
days for the class of concrete specified. The contractor shall provide
to the engineer copies of the facility’s previous batching records that
show the compressive strength results and the batch mix design
used.

31 – 6
For a job mix based upon a laboratory trial mix, the trial mix shall
contain the actual material to be used in the final job mix, have a
slump within 0.75 inches of the maximum allowable slump, an have
an air content within 0.5 percent of the maximum allowable air
content. The contractor shall provide the engineer with copies of the
actual compressive strength test records for the trial mix from the
testing facility performing the test.
The trial job mix or previous batch records shall include the water
reducing admixture when a water reducing admixture is used in a
concrete mix specifically to improve the physical properties of the
hardened concrete or change portions of the mix components
In meeting strength requirements, the selected job mix proportions
must produce an average strength, fcr, exceeding the specified
compressive strength, f’c, by the amount specified below.
n s30 fcr
> 30 1.00 s The larger of
these two
equations
f’c + 1.34 s30
f’c + 2.33 s30 -
500
25 1.03 s
20 1.08 s
15 1.16 s
<15
f’c +1,000 for
f’c < 3,000
f’c + 1,200 for
f’c – 5,000
f’c + 1,400 for
f’c > 5,000
where:
n = number of consecutive compressive strength tests
s30 = standard deviation adjusted to 30 tests, lbs/in2
fcr = required average compression strength, lbs/in2
f’c = specified compressive strength of concrete, lbs/in2
s = standard deviation (lbs/in2) computed as {∑(𝑋𝑖−𝑋𝑎)2
[𝑛−1] }
1 2	⁄
where:
Xi = individual strength test result, lbs/in2
Xa = average of n strength test results, lbs/in2

31 – 7
Method 2
Responsibilities – The engineer is responsible for the design and
proportioning of the job mix. The initial job mix will be as specified in
Section 25. The engineer may adjust the initial job mix proportions
to establish the designated job mix. The engineer will provide the
contractor with a copy of each job mix as soon as the material and
proportions have been determined After the job mix as been
designated, neither the source, character, or gradation of the
aggregates nor the type or brand of cement or admixtures shall be
changed without prior approval of the engineer. During the course of
the work, the engineer may adjust the job mix proportions and batch
weights whenever necessary to meet special job conditions.
The contractor, for each class of concrete, shall be responsible for:
a. Taking the following actions and furnishing the engineer with
the following information at least 35 calendar days before any
placement of concrete, unless otherwise designated:
1) Select the source of aggregates and sample and test the
gradations of aggregates available.
2) Select the brand and type of cement.
3) Select the brand of admixtures and obtain manufacturer’s
test data and recommendation of use.
4) Identify the concrete production facility, the type of mixer,
and the mixing methods that will be used.
5) Provide from the concrete production facility consecutive
compressive strength test records and batching records
for concrete mixes that have material, proportions, and
compressive strengths within 1,000 pounds per square
inch of the proposed design mix.
b. Batching at least 3 cubic yards of the initial job mix, in the
presence of the engineer, for testing and evaluation not less
than 30 calendar days before any placement of concrete.
4. Inspection and Testing
During the course of the work, the engineer performs quality
assurance testing as required to assure the concrete meets the
contract requirements. The engineer shall have free entry to the

31 – 8
plant and equipment furnishing concrete under the contract. Proper
facilities shall be provided for the engineer to inspect material,
equipment, and processes, and to obtain samples of the concrete.
All tests and inspections are conducted so as not to interfere
unnecessarily with the manufacture, delivery, and placement of the
concrete.
Any portion of a batch may be tested by the engineer for any of the
purposes shown below. Samples taken for testing shall be
representative of that part of the batch.
a. Determining uniformity of the batch.
b. Checking compliance with requirements for slump and air
content when the batch is discharged over an extended period.
c. Checking compliance of the concrete with the specifications
when the whole amount being placed in a small structure, or a
distinct part of a larger structure, is less than full batch.
If concrete is conveyed to the placement location by pumping or
conveyor belts, the samples shall be collected at the discharge end.
When a plasticizing admixture is added to the concrete mix at the
job site, slump tests are made both before the addition of the
admixture to the concrete mix and after the admixture has been
incorporated into the concrete mix.
The tests on concrete are performed by the following methods
unless otherwise specified:
Type of Test Test Method (ASTM Designation)
Sampling C 172
Slump Test C 143
Air Content C 231 or C 173
Compression Test Specimens C 31 or C 42
Compressive Strength Testing C 39
Unit Weight C 138
Temperature C 1064

31 – 9
A strength test for concrete is the average of two standard cured
concrete cylinders prepared in accordance with ASTM C 31 from
the same sample of concrete and tested in accordance with ASTM
C 39 at 28 days, unless otherwise specified. If one cylinder shows
manifest evidence of improper sampling, molding, curing, or testing,
it shall be discarded and the strength of the remaining cylinder shall
then be considered the compressive strength of the concrete.
Should both cylinders show such defects, the entire test shall be
discarded.
If both cylinders are discarded or in place concrete that was not
sampled is in question, the in-place concrete may be sampled by
coring in accordance with ASTM C 42. For core tests, these
requirements shall be followed:
a. At least three representative cores shall be taken from each
area of concrete in question. If one or more of the cores shows
signs of being damaged before testing, it shall be replaced by
a new one.
b. Test cores shall be prepared for testing in accordance with
moisture conditioning in ASTM C 42 unless the engineer
determines that the concrete in the structure will be dry under
service conditions. If the concrete is determined to be dry
under service conditions, the cores shall be air dried
(temperature 60°F to 80°F and relative humidity less than
60%) for 7 days before testing and shall be tested dry.
5. Handling and Measurement of Material
Aggregates shall be stored or stockpiled in such a manner that
separation of coarse and fine particles of each size is avoided and
that various sizes do not become intermixed before proportioning.
Methods of handling and transporting aggregates shall avoid
contamination, excessive breakage, segregation, degradation, or
intermingling of various sizes.
Unless otherwise specified, scales shall be beam type or springless
dial type. They shall be accurate when static load tested to plus 0.4
percent of the total capacity of the scales. All exposed fulcrums,
clevises, and similar working parts of scales shall be kept clean.

31 – 10
Measuring tanks for mixing water shall be of adequate capacity to
furnish the maximum amount of mixing water required per batch.
Tanks shall be equipped with outside taps and valves to verify their
calibration unless other means are provided for readily and
accurately determining the amount of water in the tank.
The quantities of each component of the concrete mix shall be
measured by the following methods and to the accuracy indicated
below:
Cement, Fly Ash, Slag – Cement, except as otherwise specifically
permitted, shall be measured b weight or in bags on which the
weight is plainly marked. When cement, fly ash, and slag are
supplied in bulk and are measured by weight, they shall be weighed
on a scale separate from that used for other material and in a
hopper entirely free and independent of the hopper used for
weighing the aggregate. When fly ash or slag is used I the job mix,
the cement and the fly ash or slag may be weighed separately or
cumulatively by weighing the cement first and then adding the fly
ash or slag to arrive at the composite weight. The weight of the
cement and the combined weight of the cement and fly ash or slag
shall be within plus or minus 1 percent of the required weight of the
cementitious material. When cement is measured in bags, no
fraction of a bag shall be used unless weighed.
Aggregates – Aggregates shall be measured by weight unless
otherwise specifically permitted. Mix proportions shall be based on
saturated, surface-dry weights. The batch weight of each aggregate
shall be the required saturated, surface-dry weight corrected by the
weight of surface moisture it contains. The weight of each of the
specified aggregates shall be within plus or minus 2 percent of the
required weight.
Mixing Water – Mixing water shall consist of water added to the
batch, ice added to the batch, water occurring as surface moisture
on the aggregates, and water introduced in the form of admixtures.
The added water shall be measured by weight or volume to an

31 – 11
accuracy of 1 percent of the required total mixing water. Added ice
shall be measured by weight. Wash water shall not be used as part
of the mixing water for succeeding batches.
Admixtures – Dry admixtures shall be measured by weight. Paste or
liquid admixtures shall be measured by weight or volume. The
admixtures shall be within plus or minus 3 percent of the required
weight or volume for each specific admixture.
6. Mixers and Mixing
Mixers are either stationary parts of a central mixing plant or
portable equipment, such as revolving drum truck mixers and
volumetric batching/continuous mixing truck mixers. Mixers shall be
capable of thoroughly mixing the concrete ingredients into a uniform
mass within the specified mixing time and of discharging the mix
without segregation. Each mixer or agitator shall bear a
manufacturer’s rating plate indicating the gross volume of the drum,
the capacity of the drum or container in terms of the volume of
mixed concrete, and the minimum and maximum mixing speeds of
rotation of the drum, blades, or paddles. When the truck mixer is
used for truck mixed concrete as described in Section 6a(2) or for
shrink mixed concrete as described in Section 6a(3), the capacity of
the drum or container in terms of the volume of mixed concrete shall
not exceed 63 percent of the gross volume of the drum. When the
truck mixer is used to transport central-mixed concrete as described
in Section 6a(1), the capacity of the drum or container in terms of
the volume of mixed concrete shall not exceed 80 percent of the
gross volume of the drum. The mixer shall be operated in
accordance with these recommendations.
Concrete shall be uniform and thoroughly mixed when delivered to
the forms in a freshly mixed and unhardened state. Variations in
slump of more than 1 inch within a batch is considered evidence of
inadequate mixing and shall be corrected by changing batching
procedures, increasing mixing time, changing mixers, or other
means. Mixing time shall be within the limits specified below unless
the contractor demonstrates by mixer performance tests that
adequate uniformity is obtained by different times of mixing.

31 – 12
No mixing water in excess of the amount called for by the job mix
shall be added to the concrete during mixing or hauling or after
arrival at the delivery point. Water to compensate for up to a 1-inch
loss in slump may be added, not to exceed the design maximum
water cement ratio. Withholding some of the mixing water until the
concrete arrives on the job, then adding the remaining water and
turning the mixer 30 revolutions at mixing speed is allowed to
overcome transporting conditions. When loss of slump or workability
cannot be offset by these measures, complete mixing shall be
performed by onsite batching and mixing or by using a combination
of centrally batching and transporting material to the site and adding
remainder of material onsite.
Concrete may be furnished by ready-mix methods, by volumetric
batching and continuous mixing at the site, or by batch mixing at the
site.
a. Ready-Mixed Concrete
Ready-mixed concrete shall be mixed, transported, and placed
in a freshly mixed and unhardened state. The contractor shall
furnish the engineer a batch ticket showing amount of concrete
in cubic yards, the time of loading, the time the load was
discharged, the revolution counter reading at the time of
loading and discharge, and the type and actual quantity of
each material including all admixtures used in each batch of
concrete.
Truck mixers and truck agitators shall be equipped with
revolution counters by which the number of revolutions of the
drum or blades may be readily verified. Ready-mixed concrete
shall be mixed and delivered by one of the following methods:
1) Central-Mixed Concrete – Central-mixed concrete is
mixed completely in a stationary mixer and transported to
the point of delivery either in a truck agitator, a truck mixer
operating at agitating speed, or non-agitating equipment.

31 – 13
When a truck agitator or a truck mixer is used as an
agitator and transports concrete that has been completely
mixed in a stationary mixer, mixing during transportation
shall be at the speed designated by the manufacturer of
the equipment as agitating speed. When concrete is
transported in a truck mixer or truck agitator, the volume
of the mixed concrete shall not exceed 80 percent of the
gross volume of the drum. The total number of revolutions
of the truck mixer or truck agitator shall not exceed 200
before discharge of the concrete, unless otherwise
specified.
The use of nonagitating equipment to transport concrete
to the site of the work is permitted only if the consistency
and uniformity of the concrete as discharged at the point
of delivery meet the requirements of this specification.
Bodies of nonagitating hauling equipment shall be
constructed so that leakage of the concrete mix, or any
part thereof, does not occur. Concrete hauled in open top
vehicles shall be protected from rain and from more than
20 minutes exposure to the sun and wind when the air
temperature is above 75°F.
2) Truck-Mixed Concrete – Truck-mixed concrete is
completely mixed in a truck mixer. The total volume of all
ingredients to be mixed in a revolving drum truck mixer
shall not exceed 63 percent of the gross volume of the
drum. The concrete ingredients shall be mixed between
70 and 100 revolutions of the drum or blades at the speed
designated by the manufacturer as mixing speed. Mixing
in excess of 100 revolutions shall be at the speed
designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as
agitating speed. The total number of revolutions shall not
exceed 300 before discharge of the concrete unless
otherwise specified.
3) Shrink-Mixed Concrete – Shrink-mixed concrete is partly
mixed at a central plant and the mixing is completed in a
truck mixer. The mixing time in the central plant mixer is
the minimum required to intermingle the ingredients. The

31 – 14
volume of the mixed concrete in a truck mixer shall not
exceed 63 percent of the gross volume of the truck drum.
The mixing shall be completed in a truck mixer. The
number of revolutions of the truck mixer drum or blades
shall be between 50 and 100 revolutions at the speed
designated by the manufacturer as mixing speed. Mixing
in excess of 100 revolutions shall be at the speed
designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as
agitating speed. The total number of revolutions shall not
exceed 300 before discharge of the concrete unless
otherwise specified.
b. Volumetric Batching and Continuous Mixing at the Site
Volumetric batching and continuous mixing at the site is
commonly referred to as mobile concrete mixers. Unless
otherwise specified volumetric batching and continuous mixing
at the construction site is permitted. The batching and mixing
equipment shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 685
and shall be demonstrated before placement of concrete by
tests with the job mix to produce concrete meeting the
specified proportioning and uniformity requirements. Concrete
made by this method shall be
produced, inspected, and documented in conformance with
sections 6, 7, 8, 13, and 14 of ASTM C 685.
c. Batch Mixing at the Site
This method of batching and mixing concrete is either by
batching and mixing all material onsite using paving mixers or
stationary construction mixers or by using a combination of
centrally batching part of the mix, transporting it to the site, and
adding the rest of the material and mixing onsite.
Paving mixers or stationary construction mixers and
associated transport vehicles shall be in accordance with
recommended practices described in method 1 for central
mixed concrete. The time for mixing a batch of concrete in the
mixer drum shall be according to manufacturer's
recommendations, but not less than 1 minute plus 0.25 minute

31 – 15
for each cubic yard of concrete being mixed (8 yd3 batch = 3
minutes).
When a combination of centrally batching and transporting
material to the site and adding rest of material onsite is used,
the contractor shall prepare a written plan detailing how the
batching and mixing of the concrete material will be
accomplished and controlled. This written batching and mixing
plan shall be submitted to the engineer for review and approval
not less than 10 working days before the placement of
concrete. The volume of the mixed concrete in a truck mixer
shall not exceed 63 percent of the gross volume of the drum.
The contractor shall furnish the engineer a batching ticket for
each batch of fresh concrete. The ticket shows the type, brand,
and amount of cement; the type, name, and amount of each
admixture; total water added to the batch, which includes free
water on the aggregate; maximum size of aggregate; the type
and dry weight of fine aggregate; the type and dry weight of
coarse aggregate; the time of loading (the time that water was
introduced to the cement); and the time the load was
discharged.
7. Forms
Forms shall be of good quality wood, plywood, steel, or other
approved material and shall be mortar tight. The forms and
associated falsework shall be substantial and unyielding and shall
be constructed so that the finished concrete conforms to the
specified dimensions and contours. Form surfaces shall be smooth
and free from holes, dents, sags, or other irregularities and shall be
maintained in this condition throughout the work. Forms shall be
coated with a nonstaining form release agent before being set into
place. Acceptable tolerances for formed structure members are
specified in Section 23.
When a superplasticized concrete mix is used, forms shall be
coated according to the manufacturer's recommendations with a
form release agent that is specifically formulated for plasticized

31 – 16
concrete. Forms shall be designed to withstand the increased
pressures of the superplasticized concrete and the increased
impact forces resulting from larger drop heights used in placing the
superplasticized concrete.
Metal ties or anchorages that will be embedded in the concrete shall
be equipped with cones, she-bolts, or other devices that permit their
removal to a depth of at least 1 inch without injury to the concrete.
Ties designed to break off below the surface of the concrete shall
not be used without cones. If approved fiberglass or plastic form ties
are used, the tie ends shall be cut flush with the finished concrete
and ground smooth.
All edges that will be exposed shall be chamfered unless finished
with molding tools as specified in
Section 18.
8. Preparation of Forms and Subgrade
Before placement of concrete, the forms, embedments, and
subgrade shall be free of chips, sawdust, debris, water, ice, snow,
extraneous oil, mortar, or other harmful substances or coatings. Any
form release agent on the reinforcing steel or other surfaces
required to be bonded to the concrete shall be removed.
Rock surfaces shall be cleaned by high pressure air-water cutting,
sandblasting, or wire brush scrubbing, as necessary, and shall be
wetted immediately before placement of concrete. The earth
surface shall be firm and damp. Placement of concrete on mud,
dried earth, noncompacted fill, or frozen subgrade is not permitted.
All ice, snow, and frost shall be removed, and the temperature of all
surfaces, including the reinforcing steel and other steel inclusions,
to be in contact with the new concrete shall be no colder than 40°F.
Items to be embedded in the concrete shall be positioned
accurately and anchored firmly.
Weepholes in walls or slabs shall be formed with nonferrous
material.

31 – 17
9. Conveying
Concrete shall be delivered to the site and discharged completely
into the forms within 1.5 hours or before the drum of truck has
revolved a total of 300 revolutions, whichever comes first, after the
introduction of the mixing water to the cement and aggregates or
the introduction of the cement to the aggregates. In hot weather or
under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete, or
when the temperature of the concrete is 85°F or above, the time
between the introduction of the cement to the aggregates and
discharge shall not exceed 45 minutes.
Superplasticized concrete can be conveyed and placed when the
temperature of the concrete is below 95°F and the slump of the
concrete remains within the allowable slump range.
The engineer can allow an appropriate extension of time when the
setting time of the concrete is increased
a corresponding amount by the addition of an approved admixture.
In any case concrete shall be conveyed from the mixer to the forms
as rapidly as practicable by methods that prevent segregation of the
aggregates or loss of mortar.
10. Placing
Concrete shall not be placed until the subgrade, forms, steel
reinforcement, and other embedments are inspected and approved
by the engineer. For walls and columns, subsequent higher
placements of concrete shall not be placed until the concrete below
the new placement has gained sufficient strength to support the
concrete dead load and any superimposed loads without distress.
Placement sequences and timing shall consider form removal
timing covered in Section 16.
If a placement plan is required in Section 25, concrete shall not be
placed until the placement plan has been reviewed and approved
by the engineer. The contractor shall have all equipment and
material required for curing available at the site ready for use before
placement of concrete begins.

31 – 18
Concrete shall be placed only in the presence of the engineer. The
contractor shall give reasonable notice to the engineer before each
placement. Such notice shall be far enough in advance to give the
engineer adequate time to assure that the subgrade, forms, steel
reinforcement, and other preparations comply with specifications.
Other preparations include, but are not limited to, the concrete
batching plant, mixing and delivery equipment and system, placing
and finishing equipment and system, schedule of work, workforce,
and heating or cooling facilities, as applicable. All deficiencies are to
be corrected before concrete is delivered for placing.
Concrete shall be placed and consolidated to prevent segregation
of the mix components. The concrete shall be deposited as closely
as possible to its final position in the forms. It shall be worked into
the corners and angles of the forms and around all reinforcement
and embedded items to prevent segregation of aggregates or
excessive laitance. The depositing of concrete shall be regulated so
that the concrete can be consolidated with a minimum of lateral
movement. Concrete placed against a sloping surface shall start at
the lowest elevation and work upwards to the highest elevation.
Concrete other than architectural concrete shall not be dropped
more than 5 feet vertically unless suitable equipment is used to
prevent segregation. Architectural concrete shall not be dropped
more than 3 feet vertically unless suitable equipment is used to
prevent segregation. When a superplasticized concrete mix is used,
concrete other than architectural concrete shall not be dropped
more than 12 feet vertically and architectural concrete shall not be
dropped more than 10 feet vertically unless suitable equipment is
used to prevent segregation.
11. Layers
Slab concrete shall be placed to design thickness in one continuous
layer unless otherwise specified. Formed concrete shall be placed
in horizontal layers not more than 20 inches deep. Where a
superplasticized concrete mix is used, formed concrete may be
placed in horizontal layers not more than 5 feet deep.

31 – 19
Successive layers of fresh concrete between construction joints
shall be placed at a rate fast enough that the preceding layer is still
plastic and can be easily mixed with the fresh concrete such that
seams (cold joints) or plane of weakness do not occur. If the surface
of a previously placed layer of concrete has taken a set to the
degree that it will not flow and mix with the succeeding layer when
vibrated, the contractor shall discontinue placing concrete and shall
make a construction joint according to the procedure specified in
Section 13. If placing is discontinued when a layer is incomplete,
the ends of the incomplete layer shall be formed by a vertical
bulkhead.
12. Consolidating
All concrete shall be consolidated with internal type mechanical
vibrators capable of transmitting vibration to the concrete at
frequencies not less than 8,000 impulses per minute, unless
otherwise specified or approved before placement. Vibration shall
be supplemented by spading, rodding, and hand tamping as
necessary to ensure smooth and dense concrete along the form
surface, in corners, and around embedded items. The contractor
shall provide a sufficient number of vibrators to properly consolidate
the concrete immediately after it is placed. A sufficient number of
standby vibrators shall be kept onsite during the placement of
concrete.
Vibration shall compact the concrete and bring it into intimate
contact with the forms, reinforcing steel, and other embedded items
while removing voids and pockets of entrapped air. The location,
insertion, duration, and removal of the vibrators shall be such that
maximum consolidation of the concrete is achieved without causing
segregation of the mortar and coarse aggregate or causing water or
cement paste to flush to the surface. Vibration shall be applied to
the freshly deposited concrete by rapidly inserting the vibrator and
slowly, in an up and down motion, removing the vibrator at points
uniformly spaced at not more than 1.5 times the radius of the area
visibly effected by vibration. Generally, this is at 5 to 10 seconds per
foot on 14-inch spacings or less. The area visibly effected by the

31 – 20
vibrator shall overlap the adjacent, just vibrated area. The vibrator
shall extend vertically into the previously placed layer of fresh
concrete by at least 6 inches at all points. This ensures effective
bond between layers. In thin slabs the vibrator(s) should be sloped
toward the horizontal to allow operations in a fully embedded
position.
Vibration shall not be applied directly to the reinforcement steel, the
forms, or other embedded items unless otherwise specified.
Vibration shall not be applied to concrete that has hardened to the
degree that it does not become plastic when vibrated. If surface
vibrators are used, they may contact forms when consolidating thin
slabs.
The use of vibrators to transport concrete in the forms or conveying
equipment is not permitted.
Surface vibrators may be used to consolidate slabs 8 inches and
less in thickness. Slabs more than 8 inches thick shall be
consolidated with internal vibration and may be augmented through
use of surface vibrator, such as vibrating screeds, plate or grid
vibratory tampers, or vibratory roller screeds. If concrete is to be
consolidated using surface vibration methods, the contractor shall
detail how this work is to be performed in writing to the engineer for
review and approval. This report must be submitted no less than 30
calendar days before placing concrete by this method. It includes
equipment selection and specifications.
13. Construction Joints
Construction joints shall be made at the locations shown on the
drawings unless otherwise specified or approved by the engineer. If
construction joints are needed that are not shown on the drawings,
they shall be placed in locations approved by the engineer.
Where a feather edge would be produced at a construction joint, as
in the top surface of a sloping wall, an insert form shall be used so
that the resulting edge thickness on either side of the joint is not

31 – 21
less than twice the maximum aggregate diameter used in the
concrete mix.
Nonvertical construction joints in structural elements, such as walls
and columns, shall be consolidated and screeded to grade unless
otherwise specified. Construction joints shall be covered and wet
cured for 7 days or until concrete placement resumes unless
otherwise specified.
Steel tying and form construction next to concrete in place shall not
be started until the concrete has cured at least 12 hours. Before
new concrete is deposited on or against concrete that has
hardened, the forms shall be retightened. New concrete shall not be
placed until the hardened concrete has cured at least 12 hours.
Method 1 – The surface of construction joints shall be cleaned of all
unsatisfactory concrete, laitance, coatings, stains, or debris by
sandblasting or high-pressure air-water cutting, or both.
Sandblasting can be used after the concrete has gained sufficient
strength to resist excessive cutting, and high-pressure air-water
cutting can be used as soon as the concrete has hardened
sufficiently to prevent the jet from displacing the coarse aggregates.
The surface of the concrete in place shall be cut to expose clean,
sound aggregate, but not so deep as to undercut the edges of
larger particles of the aggregate. After cutting, the surface shall be
thoroughly washed to remove all loose material. If the surface is
congested by reinforcing steel, is relatively inaccessible, has cured
beyond the ability to cut with air-water blasting, or disturbing the
concrete before it is hardened is considered undesirable, cleaning
of the joint by air or water jets is not permitted. The sandblasting
method is required after the concrete has hardened.
Immediately before new concrete is placed, all construction joints
shall be wetted and standing water removed.
Method 2 – The surface of construction joints shall be cleaned of all
unsatisfactory concrete, laitance, coatings, stains, or debris by
washing and scrubbing with a wire brush or wire broom, or by other

31 – 22
means approved by the engineer. Immediately before new concrete
is placed, all construction joints shall be wetted and standing water
removed.
14. Expansion and Contraction Joints
Expansion and contraction joints shall be made only at locations
shown on the drawings. Exposed concrete edges at expansion and
contraction joints shall be carefully tooled or chamfered, and the
joints shall be free of mortar and concrete. Joint filler shall be fully
exposed for its entire length with clean and true edges.
Where open joints or weakened plane "dummy" joints are specified,
joints formed in fresh concrete shall be constructed by the insertion
and subsequent removal of a wood strip, metal plate, or other
suitable template. This will be done so that the corners of the
concrete do not chip or break. The edges of the fresh concrete at
the joints shall be finished with an edging tool before the joint strips
are removed. Open joints or weakened plane dummy joints may
also be sawcut joints conforming to the depth and extent specified.
Preformed expansion joint filler shall be held firmly in the correct
position as the concrete is placed.
15. Waterstops
Waterstops shall be held firmly in the correct position as the
concrete is placed. Joints in metal waterstops shall be brazed or
welded. Joints in rubber or plastic waterstops shall be cemented,
welded, or vulcanized as recommended by the manufacturer. Joints
shall be watertight and of a strength equivalent to that specified in
Material Specification NON-METALLIC WATERSTOPS 537.
Intersecting waterstop joints shall be prefabricated and supplied by
the same manufacturer providing the waterstop.
16. Removal of Forms, Supports, and Protective Coverings
Forms, supports, and protective coverings shall be removed as
soon as practical after the concrete has gained sufficient strength to
support its own weight and superimposed loads. Removal shall be
done so that the concrete surface is not damaged and sudden or

31 – 23
excessive stresses are not induced. The minimum period from
completion of the concrete placement to the removal of the forms
shall be based on either strength tests or cumulative times.
Strength Tests – The strength of the in-place concrete is determined
by testing concrete cylinders specifically cast for this purpose and
cured adjacent to the member in accordance with the ASTM C 31
method for determining removal time. Unless otherwise specified,
forms supporting the weight of the concrete member may be
removed after the concrete strength is 70 percent of that specified
for the class of concrete. Forms not supporting the weight of the
concrete member or other superimposed loads may be removed
after the concrete strength has reached the strength specified in
Section 25.
Cumulative Time – The total accumulated time, not necessarily
continuous, that the air adjacent to the concrete is above 50°F and
the specified concrete curing has occurred concurrently will be
determined. Forms may be removed after the total accumulated
time shown:
Accumulated Form Removal Times
Forms Time1
Sides of Slabs or Beams 12 hours
Undersides of Slabs or
Beams
Clear Span
< 10 ft.
10 – 20 ft.
> 20 ft.
2
4 days
7 days
14 days
Sides of Walls or
Columns
Height Above Form
< 10 ft.
< 20 ft.
> 20 ft.
3,4
12 hours
24 hours
72 hours
1Table values apply to normal concrete. Values for concrete that contains cements or admixtures
that significantly retard or accelerate strength gain will be determined by the engineer and based
on actual design mix data.
2Values apply to members designed to support significant superimposed loads. Values for
members designed for only self weight when placed in service shall be 50 percent greater.
3Values apply to members not subject to significant horizontal loads. Additional time or rebracing
is needed for members subject to significant wind or other horizontal loads.
4Subsequent higher lifts may be placed after 12 hours.

31 – 24
17. Finishing Formed Surfaces
All formed concrete surfaces shall be true and even, and shall be
free from overtolerance depressions, holes, projections, bulges, or
other defects in the specified surface finish or alignment, unless
otherwise specified in Section 25. Depressions are measured as the
distance from the bottom of a 5-foot-long
template or straight edge.
A surface to be backfilled or otherwise concealed when construction
is completed shall have the following surface treatment unless
otherwise specified:
• Repair defective concrete
• Fill all form tie holes
• Correct surface depressions deeper than 1 inch
• Remove or smooth fins and abrupt projections that exceed
0.75 inch
A surface to be permanently exposed, where other finishes are not
specified, shall have the following treatment:
• Repair defective concrete
• Fill all form tie holes
• Remove or smooth all abrupt irregularities greater than 0.25
inch in depth or projection
• Treat all depressions and irregularities so that they do not
exceed 0.5 inch in depth
Form bolt and tie holes and other holes of similar size and depth
shall be repaired and filled as specified in Section 20.
18. Finishing Unformed Surfaces
All exposed surfaces of the concrete shall be accurately screeded
to grade and then float finished unless otherwise specified. The float
finish shall result in a surface that has no irregularities of more than
0.25 inch when checked with a template or straight edge that is 10
feet long.

31 – 25
All exposed surfaces of concrete shall be accurately struck off to
grade after placement and consolidation are completed. Following
strike off, the surface shall be immediately smoothed by darbying or
bull floating before any free water has bled to the surface. The
concrete shall then be allowed to rest until the bleed water and
water sheen have left the surface and the concrete has stiffened to
where it will sustain foot pressure with only about 0.25-inch
indentation. At this time all joints and edges that are exposed to
view and are not chamfered shall be finished with edging tools. After
edging and hand jointing is complete, all exposed surfaces shall be
floated with wood or magnesium floats. The floating should work the
concrete no more than necessary to remove screed, edger, and
jointer marks and to produce a compact surface uniform in texture.
Water shall not be sprinkled or added to the surface of the concrete
during the darbying, bull floating, floating, or other finishing
operations to facilitate finishing.
19. Curing
Freshly placed concrete shall be cured a minimum of 7 days in
accordance with the recommended practices set forth in this
section. A curing process shall be started as soon as the concrete
has hardened sufficiently to prevent surface damage. Curing
concrete, including exposed surfaces of formed concrete and
concrete in forms, shall be maintained at a satisfactory moisture
content for at least 7 days following placement. If forms are
removed before the end of the 7-day curing period, the interrupted
curing process shall be reestablished and maintained until a full 7-
day curing period is achieved. A satisfactory moisture condition is:
• Continuous or frequent application of water or use of a
saturated cover material, such as canvas, cloth, burlap, earth,
or sand.
• Prevention of excessive water loss from the concrete by use of
an impermeable coating (curing compound) or covering
(plastic, paper).

31 – 26
The application of water or covering shall not erode, mar, or
otherwise damage the concrete. Plastic film or paper shall meet the
requirements of ASTM C 171. Black covering shall not be used
when concreting in hot weather.
Except as otherwise specified in Section 25, curing compound may
be used for exposed surfaces or formed surfaces after patching and
repair are completed. Unless otherwise specified, the curing
compound shall be white pigmented and conform to ASTM C 309,
Type 2, Class A or B. Clear curing compound (Type 1) or clear with
fugitive dye (Type 1-D) may be used only when specified in Section
25. Curing compounds shall not be used on a surface that is to
receive additional concrete, paint, tile, or other coatings unless the
contractor demonstrates that the membrane can be satisfactorily
removed or can serve as a base for the later application.
Curing compound shall be thoroughly mixed before applying and be
agitated during application. Except as otherwise specified in section
25, the compound shall be applied at a pressure of 75 to 100
pounds per square inch. A continuously agitating pressure sprayer
is used for application at a uniform rate of not less than 1 gallon per
175 square feet of surface. Manual hand pump sprayers shall not
be used unless otherwise specified. For individual concrete
placements or repairs having a surface area of 400 square feet or
less, curing compound may be applied with a soft-bristled brush,
paint roller, or hand sprayer. The compound shall form a uniform,
continuous, adherent film that shall not check, crack, or peel and
shall be free from pinholes or other imperfections.
All surfaces covered with curing compound shall be continuously
protected from damage to the protective film during the required
curing period.
A surface subjected to heavy rainfall or running water within 3 hours
after the compound has been applied or that is damaged by
subsequent construction operations during the curing period shall
be resprayed in the same manner as for the original application.

31 – 27
Water for curing shall be clean and free from any substances that
cause discoloration of the concrete.
20. Concrete Patching, Repair, or Replacement
Patching – All form bolts, metal ties, and similar forming restraints
shall be removed to a depth of 1 inch below the surface of the
concrete and their cavities repaired unless otherwise specifically
permitted or specified. Small cavities, large air holes, minor
honeycombed areas, and other superficial imperfections that
require patching to meet the specified finish requirements shall be
thoroughly cleaned and filled. Holes left by bolts or straps that pass
through the concrete section shall be filled solid with a dense, well-
bonded, non-shrink patching material. Dry-pack mortar and
replacement concrete shall follow the appropriate procedure
detailed in the Repair and Maintenance chapter of the Concrete
Manual, Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Department of the Interior.
Proprietary patching material shall be appropriate for the type of
repair, used within the manufacturer's recommended limits, and
applied according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
Repair or Replacement – The contractor shall repair or replace
concrete that does not meet the requirements of this specification.
Before starting any repair or replacement work, the contractor shall
prepare a written plan for the repair or replacement. The primary
reference for material and repair methods for the plan shall be the
appropriate sections of the Repair and Maintenance chapter of the
Concrete Manual, Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Department of the
Interior. The repair plan shall be submitted to the engineer for
review at least 10 days before any repair or replacement work.
Approval of the plan will be authorized in writing by the contracting
officer.
When proprietary patching material is proposed in the plan, the
manufacturer's data sheets and written recommendations shall be
included in the plan.

31 – 28
Repair material or replacement concrete shall have properties,
color, and texture similar to and compatible with the concrete being
repaired or replaced. Repair or replacement concrete work shall be
performed only when the engineer is present.
Curing of repaired or replaced concrete shall be started immediately
after finish work is completed and as specified in Section 19 or as
specified by the manufacturer of proprietary compounds.
21. Concreting in Cold Weather
Methods for concreting in cold weather shall be performed when, for
more than 3 consecutive days, the following conditions exist:
• The average daily air temperature at the job site is less than
40°F. (The average daily air temperature is the average of the
highest and lowest temperatures occurring during the period
from midnight to midnight.)
• The air temperature at the job site is not more than 50°F for
more than half of any 24-hour period.
Concrete shall be protected against freezing during the first 24
hours after placement whether or not the average weather
conditions specified above for cold weather concreting exist. The
following provisions also shall apply unless otherwise specified:
a. When the cement is added to the mix, the temperature of the
mixing water shall not exceed 140°F nor shall the temperature
of the aggregate exceed 150°F.
b. The temperature of the concrete at the time of placing shall be
within the placement temperature range shown below, unless
otherwise specified.
Least Dimension of Section,
Inches Placement Temperature, °F
Less than 12 55 – 75
12 to 36 50 – 70
36 to 72 45 – 65
Greater than 72 40 – 60

31 – 29
c. The minimum temperature of the concrete for the first 72 hours
after placement shall not be less than the minimum
temperature shown above. Concrete structures shall be
immediately protected after concrete placement by covering,
housing, insulating, or heating concrete structures sufficiently
to maintain the minimum temperature adjacent to the concrete
surface. If the minimum temperature requirements are not met
and the concrete did not freeze, the protection time will be
extended a period equal to twice the number of hours the
temperature was below the minimum temperature.
d. Exhaust flue gases from combustion heaters shall be vented to
the outside of the enclosure. The heat from heaters and ducts
shall be directed in such a manner as to not overheat or dry
the concrete in localized areas or to dry the exposed concrete
surface.
e. At the end of the protection period, the concrete shall be
allowed to cool gradually. The maximum decrease at the
concrete surface in a 24-hour period shall not exceed 40°F.
22. Concreting in Hot Weather
Methods for concreting in hot weather shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth below.
For the purpose of this specification, hot weather is defined as any
combination of the following conditions that impair the quality of
freshly mixed or hardened concrete by accelerating the rate of
moisture loss and rate of cement hydration, or otherwise resulting in
detrimental results:
• High ambient temperature
• High concrete temperature
• Low relative humidity
• Wind velocity
• Solar radiation
Whenever the above conditions exist or when climatic conditions
are such that the temperature of the concrete may reasonably be
expected to exceed 90°F at the time of delivery to the worksite or

31 – 30
during the placement operations, the following provisions shall
apply:
a. The contractor shall maintain the temperature of the concrete
below 90°F during mixing, conveying, and placing.
b. Exposed concrete surfaces that tend to dry or set too rapidly
shall be continuously moistened using fog sprays or other
means to maintain adequate moisture during the time between
placement and finishing. Water shall not be sprinkled or added
directly to the surface of the concrete before finishing.
c. Finishing of slabs and other exposed surfaces shall be started
as soon as the condition of the concrete allows and shall be
completed without delay. Water shall not be sprinkled or added
to the surface of the concrete during the darbying, bull floating,
floating, or other finishing operations to facilitate finishing.
d. Formed surfaces shall be kept completely and continuously
wet from the time the concrete takes initial set to when the
forms are removed. After the forms are removed, the concrete
surfaces shall be kept completely and continuously wet for the
duration of the curing period or until curing compound is
applied in accordance to Section 21.
e. Exposed and unformed concrete surfaces, especially flat work
placed with large areas of surface, shall be kept completely
and continuously wet for the duration of the curing period or
until curing compound is applied in accordance to Section 19.
The concrete shall be protected against thermal shock from
rapid cooling (5°F per hour or more than 40°F per 24-hour
period) of the concrete by application of curing water or
temperature changes during the first 24 hours of the curing
period.
f. When any single or combination of conditions may result in
very rapid setting or drying of the concrete, extreme conditions
exist. For flat work and slab construction, extreme conditions
exist when the evaporation rate exceeds 0.2 pound per square
foot per hour. The engineer may:
1) Restrict placement to the most favorable time of the day.
2) Restrict the depth of layers to assure coverage of the
previous layer while it will still respond readily to vibration.

31 – 31
3) Suspend placement until conditions improve.
4) Restrict the removal of forms, repair, and patching to
small areas that can be protected with curing compound
immediately.
The evaporation rate for flat work and slab construction may be
determined by calculating the evaporation rate from a shallow cake
pan having a surface area of at least 1 square foot or by other
methods approved by the engineer or designated in Section 25.
23. Acceptance of the Concrete Work
Acceptance of the concrete work will be a cumulative acceptance
process based upon progressively meeting the requirements of the
specifications and drawings for:
• Fresh concrete
• Concrete strength and durability
• Structure dimensions
• Structure appearance
Fresh Concrete – Fresh concrete conforming to the mix proportions
and quality requirements of the approved job mix and the handling
and placement requirements of previous sections will be
satisfactory.
Concrete Strength – A strength test is the average of the
compressive strengths of two standard cured cylinders prepared
and tested in accordance with Section 4, unless otherwise
specified. The strength of the hardened concrete is satisfactory if
the following requirements are met:
a. If Method 1 from Section 3 is specified and the concrete work
is less than 75 total cubic yards for the class of concrete
specified, the compressive strength of the concrete is
satisfactory if no individual strength test falls more than 500
pounds per square inch below the specified compressive
strength (f'c) for the respective class of concrete.

31 – 32
b. If Method 1 from Section 3 is specified and the concrete work
is 75 total cubic yards or more for the class of concrete
specified, the compressive strength of the concrete is
satisfactory if both of the following requirements are met:
1) No individual strength test falls more than 500 pounds per
square inch below the specified compressive strength (f'c)
for the class of concrete specified.
2) The average of any three consecutive strength tests is
not less than the specified compressive strength (f'c) two
or more consecutive times for the class of concrete
specified. The contractor shall take steps to increase the
average of subsequent strength tests when the average
of any three consecutive strength tests falls below the
specified concrete strength (f'c).
c. The engineer determines the structural adequacy and
evaluates the durability of the in-place concrete when the
concrete strength based on the standard cured concrete
cylinders is unsatisfactory. The engineer determines the need
for additional quality assurance testing.
d. The contractor may core the concrete, have the cores tested
by a certified testing laboratory at the contractor's expense,
and submit test results to the engineer for consideration and
evaluation of concrete strength adequacy when the concrete
strength based on the standard cured concrete cylinders is
unsatisfactory.
e. Sampling and testing concrete by coring shall conform to
Section 4. The strength of the concrete based upon concrete
cores is satisfactory if both of the following requirements are
met:
1) The average compressive strength of the three cores
equal or exceed 85 percent of the specified compressive
strength (f'c).
2) The compressive strength of any individual core does not
fall below 75 percent of the specified compressive
strength (f'c).

31 – 33
f. If Method 2 from Section 3 is specified, the engineer is
responsible for the concrete job mix design and the quality
concrete that results from the job mix.
The hardened concrete is satisfactory if the required batch
tickets or other documentation acceptable to the engineer
clearly show that the batch ingredients and weights of each
ingredient including all admixtures conforms to the job mix
provided by the engineer. Random periodic inspection of the
batching operations may be made by the engineer to verify
that ingredients and ingredient proportions conform to the
batching documentation.
If the concrete ingredients, proportions, or admixtures varies
from the job mix provided by the engineer, the concrete may
be rejected if, in the judgment of the engineer, the variance will
significantly affect the strength or durability of the concrete or
will adversely affect the life expectancy or other components of
the structure.
Structure Dimensions and Appearance
The appearance of the concrete shall meet the requirements of
Sections 17 and 18.
The dimensions of formed members, unless otherwise specified,
are satisfactory if they conform to the requirements of the
specifications, the locations shown on the drawings, and are within
acceptable tolerances:
a. Variation from plumb for walls and column shall be not more
than 0.2 percent of the wall or column height.
b. Variation from specified elevations for slabs, floors, or other
horizontal members shall be not more than 0.2 percent of the
length of the member in the direction of grade.
c. Variations in the cross-sectional dimensions of columns and
beams and in the thickness of walls and above-grade slabs

31 – 34
shall not be more than minus 0.25 inch or plus 0.5 inch from
the shown dimensions.
24. Measurement and Payment
For items of work for which specific unit prices are established in
the contract, concrete is measured to the neat lines or pay limits
shown on the drawings, and the volume of concrete is computed to
the nearest 0.1 cubic yard. No deduction in volume is made for
chamfers, rounded or beveled edges, or for any void or embedded
item that is less than 5 cubic feet in volume. Where concrete is
placed against the sides or bottom of an excavation without
intervening forms, drainfill, or bedding, the volume of concrete
required to fill voids resulting from overexcavation outside the neat
lines or pay limits is included in the measurement for payment
where such overexcavation is directed by the engineer to remove
unsuitable foundation material. However, this payment is only to the
extent that the unsuitable condition is not a result of the contractor's
improper construction operations, as determined by the engineer.
Method 1 – Payment for each item of concrete is made at the
contract unit price for that item. The payment for concrete will
constitute full compensation for completion of the concrete work,
including joint fillers, waterstops, dowels or dowel assemblies, and
metal plates, but not including reinforcing steel or other items listed
for payment elsewhere in the contract.
Method 2 – Payment for each item of concrete is made at the
contract unit price for that item. The payment for concrete
constitutes full compensation for completion of the concrete work,
including joint fillers, waterstops, metal plates, dowels, and other
assemblies. It does not include furnishing and placing reinforcing
steel or furnishing and handling cement or other items listed for
payment elsewhere in the contract.
Cement is measured by dividing the volume of concrete accepted
for payment by the yield of the applicable job mix. The yield is
determined by the procedure specified in ASTM C 138. If the
amount of cement actually used per batch exceeds the amount in

31 – 35
the job mix specified by the engineer, the measurement is based on
the amount of cement specified by the engineer for the job mix.
Unless otherwise stated in Section 25, a bag of cement is
considered 94 pounds. Payment for each type of cement will be
made at the contract unit price for furnishing and handling that type
of cement and such payment will constitute full compensation for
furnishing and handling the cement.
All Methods – The following provisions apply to all methods of
measurement and payment. Compensation for any item of work
described in the contract, but not listed in the bid schedule, will be
included in the payment for the item of work to which it is make
subsidiary. Such items and the items to which they are made
subsidiary are identified in Section 25 of this specification.
25. Items of Work and Construction Details
(210-VI-NEH, November 2005)